THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S GUIDELINES FOR DOMESTIC 
FBI OPERATIONS 

PREAMBLE 
These Guidelines are issued under the authority of the Attorney General as provided in 
sections 509,510,533, and 534 of title 28, United States Code, and Executive Order 12333. 
They apply to domestic investigative activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and 
other activities as provided herein. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................ 5 
A. FBI RESPONSIBILITIES .FEDERAL CRIMES, THREATS TO THE 
NATIONAL SECURITY. FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE ................ 6 
B. THE FBI AS AN INTELLIGENCE AGENCY ........................ 9 
C. OVERSIGHT ................................................... 10 
I. GENERAL AUTHORITIES AND PRINCIPLES ........................... 12 
A. SCOPE ........................................................ 12 
B. GENERAL AUTHORITIES ...................................... 12 
C. USE OF AUTHORITIES AND METHODS .......................... 12 
D. NATURE AND APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES .............. 14 
I1. INVESTIGATIONS AND INTELLIGENCE GATHERING .................. 16 
A. ASSESSMENTS ................................................. 19 
B. PREDICATED INVESTIGATIONS ................................ 20 
C. ENTERPRISE INVESTIGATIONS ................................ 23 
I11. ASSISTANCE TO OTHER AGENCIES .................................. 25 
A. THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY ............................. 25 
B. FEDERAL AGENCIES GENERALLY ............................. 25 
C. STATE, LOCAL. OR TRIBAL AGENCIES ......................... 27 
D. FOREIGNAGENCIES ........................................... 27 
E. APPLICABLE STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES .................. 28 
IV. INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS AND PLANNING ........................... 29 
A. STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS ......................... 29 
B. REPORTS AND ASSESSMENTS GENERALLY ..................... 29 
C. INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS ...................................... 29 
V. AUTHORIZEDMETHODS ............................................. 31 
A. PARTICULARMETHODS ....................................... 31 
B. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ..................................... 32 
C. OTHERWISE ILLEGAL ACTIVITY .............................. 33 
VI. RETENTION AND SHARING OF INFORMATION ........................ 35 
A. RETENTION OF INFORMATION ................................ 35 
B. INFORMATION SHARING GENERALLY ......................... 35 
C. INFORMATION RELATING TO CRIMINAL MATTERS ............ 36 
D. INFORMATION RELATING TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND 
FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE MATTERS ........................... 37 

VII. DEFINITIONS ........................................................ 42 

INTRODUCTION 
As the primary investigative agency of the federal government, the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) has the authority and responsibility to investigate all violations of federal law 
that are not exclusively assigned to another federal agency. The FBI is further vested by law and 
by Presidential directives with the primary role in carrying out investigations within the United 
States of threats to the national security. This includes the lead domestic role in investigating 
international terrorist threats to the United States, and in conducting counterintelligence activities 
to meet foreign entities' espionage and intelligence efforts directed against the United States. 
The FBI is also vested with important hctions in collecting foreign intelligence as a member 
agency of the U.S. Intelligence Community. The FBI accordingly plays crucial roles in the 
enforcement of federal law and the proper administration of justice in the United States, in the 
protection of the national security, and in obtaining information needed by the United States for 
the conduct of its foreign affairs. These roles reflect the wide range of the FBI's current 
responsibilities and obligations, whch require the FBI to be both an agency that effectively 
detects, investigates, and prevents crimes, and an agency that effectively protects the national 
security and collects intelligence. 
The general objective of these Guidelines is the full utilization of all authorities and 
investigative methods, consistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States, to protect 
the United States and its people from terrorism and other threats to the national security, to 
protect the United States and its people from victimization by all crimes in violation of federal 
law, and to further the foreign intelligence objectives of the United States. At the same time, it is 
axiomatic that the FBI must conduct its investigations and other activities in a lawful and 
reasonable manner that respects liberty and privacy and avoids unnecessary intrusions into the 
lives of law-abiding people. The purpose of these Guidelines, therefore, is to establish consistent 
policy in such matters. They will enable the FBI to perform its duties with effectiveness, 
certainty, and confidence, and will provide the American people with a firm assurance that the 
FBI is acting properly under the law. 
The issuance of these Guidelines represents the culmination of the hstorical evolution of 
the FBI and the policies governing its domestic operations subsequent to the September 11,2001, 
terrorist attacks on the United States. Reflecting decisions and directives of the President and the 
Attorney General, inquiries and enactments of Congress, and the conclusions of national 
commissions, it was recognized that the FBI's hctions needed to be expanded and better 
integrated to meet contemporary realities: 
[Clontinuing coordination .. .is necessary to optimize the FBI's performance in 
both national security and criminal investigations . . . . [The] new reality requires first 
that the FBI and other agencies do a better job of gathering intelligence inside the United 
States, and second that we eliminate the remnants of the old "wall" between foreign 
intelligence and domestic law enforcement. Both tasks must be accomplished without 
sacrificing our domestic liberties and the rule of law, and both depend on building a very 
different FBI from the one we had on September 10,2001. (Report of the Commission 
on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass 
Destruction 466,452 (2005).) 
In line with these objectives, the FBI has reorganized and reoriented its programs and 
missions, and the guidelines issued by the Attorney General for FBI operations have been 
extensively revised over the past several years. Nevertheless, the principal directives of the 
Attorney General governing the FBI's conduct of criminal investigations, national security 
investigations, and foreign intelligence collection have persisted as separate documents involving 
different standards and procedures for comparable activities. These Guidelines effect a more 
complete integration and harmonization of standards, thereby providing the FBI and other 
affected Justice Department components with clearer, more consistent, and more accessible 
guidance for their activities, and making available to the public in a single document the basic 
body of rules for the FBI's domestic operations. 
These Guidelines also incorporate effective oversight measures involving many 
Department of Justice and FBI components, which have been adopted to ensure that all FBI 
activities are conducted in a manner consistent with law and policy. 
The broad operational areas addressed by these Guidelines are the FBI's conduct of 
investigative and intelligence gathering activities, including cooperation and coordination with 
other components and agencies in such activities, and the intelligence analysis and planning 
functions of the FBI. 
A. 	 FBI RESPONSIBILITIES -FEDERAL CRIMES, THREATS TO THE 
NATIONAL SECURITY, FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE 
Part 11of these Guidelines authorizes the FBI to carry out investigations to detect, obtain 
information about, or prevent or protect against federal crimes or threats to the national security 
or to collect foreign intelligence. The major subject areas of information gathering activities 
under these Guidelines -federal crimes, threats to the national security, and foreign intelligence 
-are not distinct, but rather overlap extensively. For example, an investigation relating to 
international terrorism will invariably crosscut these areas because international terrorism is 
included under these Guidelines' definition of "threat to the national security," because 
international terrorism subject to investigation within the United States usually involves criminal 
acts that violate federal law, and because information relating to international terrorism also falls 
within the definition of "foreign intelligence." Likewise, counterintelligence activities relating to 
espionage are likely to concern matters that constitute threats to the national security, that 
implicate violations or potential violations of federal espionage laws, and that involve 
information falling under the definition of "foreign intelligence." 
While some distinctions in the requirements and procedures for investigations are 
necessary in different subject areas, the general design of these Guidelines is to take a uniform 
approach wherever possible, thereby promoting certainty and consistency regarding the 
applicable standards and facilitating compliance with those standards. Hence, these Guidelines 
do not require that the FBI's information gathering activities be differentially labeled as "criminal 
investigations," "national security investigations," or "foreign intelligence collections," or that 
the categories of FBI personnel who cany out investigations be segregated fiom each other based 
on the subject areas in which they operate. Rather, all of the FBI's legal authorities are available 
for deployment in all cases to which they apply to protect the public fiom crimes and threats to 
the national security and to further the United States' foreign intelligence objectives. In many 
cases, a single investigation will be supportable as an exercise of a number of these authorities -
i.e., as an investigation of a federal crime or crimes, as an investigation of a threat to the national 
security, andlor as a collection of foreign intelligence. 
1. Federal Crimes 
The FBI has the authority to investigate all federal crimes that are not exclusively 
assigned to other agencies. In most ordinary criminal investigations, the immediate objectives 
include such matters as: determining whether a federal crime has occurred or is occurring, or if 
planning or preparation for such a crime is taking place; identifjmg, locating, and apprehending 
the perpetrators; and obtaining the evidence needed for prosecution. Hence, close cooperation 
and coordination with federal prosecutors in the United States Attorneys' Offices and the Justice 
Department litigating divisions are essential both to ensure that agents have the investigative 
tools and legal advice at their disposal for which prosecutorial assistance or approval is needed, 
and to ensure that investigations are conducted in a manner that will lead to successful 
prosecution. Provisions in many parts of these Guidelines establish procedures and requirements 
for such coordination. 
2. Threats to the National Security 
The FBI's authority to investigate threats to the national security derives fiom the 
executive order concerning U.S. intelligence activities, from delegations of functions by the 
Attorney General, and fiom various statutory sources. See, e.g., E.O. 12333; 50 U.S.C. 401 et 
seq.; 50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq. These Guidelines (Part VII.S) specifically define threats to the 
national security to mean: international terrorism; espionage and other intelligence activities, 
sabotage, and assassination, conducted by, for, or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations, or 
persons; foreign computer intrusion; and other matters determined by the Attorney General, 
consistent with Executive Order 12333 or any successor order. 
Activities within the definition of "threat to the national security" that are subject to 
investigation under these Guidelines commonly involve violations (or potential violations) of 
federal criminal laws. Hence, investigations of such threats may constitute an exercise both of 
the FBI's criminal investigation authority and of the FBI's authority to investigate threats to the 
national security. As with criminal investigations generally, detecting and solving the crimes, 
and eventually arresting and prosecuting the perpetrators, are likely to be among the objectives of 
investigations relating to threats to the national security. But these investigations also often serve 
important purposes outside the ambit of normal criminal investigation and prosecution, by 
providing the basis for, and informing decisions concerning, other measures needed to protect the 
national security. These measures may include, for example: excluding or removing persons 
involved in terrorism or espionage from the United States; recruitment of double agents; freezing 
assets of organizations that engage in or support terrorism; securing targets of terrorism or 
espionage; providing threat information and warnings to other federal, state, local, and private 
agencies and entities; diplomatic or military actions; and actions by other intelligence agencies to 
counter international terrorism or other national security threats. 
In line with this broad range of purposes, investigations of threats to the national security 
present special needs to coordinate with other Justice Department components, including 
particularly the Justice Department's National Security Division, and to share information and 
cooperate with other agencies with national security responsibilities, including other agencies of 
the U.S. Intelligence Community, the Department of Homeland Security, and relevant White 
House (including National Security Council and Homeland Security Council) agencies and 
entities. Various provisions in these Guidelines establish procedures and requirements to 
facilitate such coordination. 
3. Foreign Intelligence 
As with the investigation of threats to the national security, the FBI's authority to collect 
foreign intelligence derives from a mixture of administrative and statutory sources. See, e.g., 
E.O. 12333; 50 U.S.C. 401 et seq.; 50 U.S.C. 1801 et seq.; 28 U.S.C. 532 note (incorporating 
P.L. 108-458 $5 2001-2003). These Guidelines (Part VI1.E) define foreign intelligence to mean 
"information relating to the capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign governments or 
elements thereof, foreign organizations or foreign persons, or international terrorists." 
The FBI's foreign intelligence collection activities have been expanded by legislative and 
administrative reforms subsequent to the September 1 1,2001, terrorist attacks, reflecting the 
FBI's role as the primary collector of foreign intelligence within the United States, and the 
recognized imperative that the United States' foreign intelligence collection activities become 
more flexible, more proactive, and more efficient in order to protect the homeland and adequately 
inform the United States' crucial decisions in its dealings with the rest of the world: 
The collection of information is the foundation of everything that the Intelligence 
Community does. Wle successful collection cannot ensure a good analytical product, 
the failure to collect information . . . turns analysis into guesswork. And as our review 
demonstrates, the Intelligence Community's human and technical intelligence collection 
agencies have collected far too little information on many of the issues we care about 
most. (Report of the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States 
Regafding Weapons of Mass Destruction 35 1 (2005).) 
These Guidelines accordingly provide standards and procedures for the FBI's foreign intelligence 
collection activities that meet current needs and realities and optimize the FBI's ability to 
discharge its foreign intelligence collection functions. 
The authority to collect foreign intelligence extends the sphere of the FBI's information 
gathering activities beyond federal crimes and threats to the national security, and permits the 
FBI to seek information regarding a broader range of matters relating to foreign powers, 
organizations, or persons that may be of interest to the conduct of the United States' foreign 
affairs. The FBI's role is central to the effective collection of foreign intelligence within the 
United States because the authorized domestic activities of other intelligence agencies are more 
constrained than those of the FBI under applicable statutes and Executive Order 12333. In 
collecting foreign intelligence, the FBI will generally be guided by nationally-determined 
intelligence requirements, including the National Intelligence Priorities Framework and the 
National HUMINT Collection Directives, or any successor directives issued under the authority 
of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI). As provided in Part VII.F of these Guidelines, 
foreign intelligence requirements may also be established by the President or Intelligence 
Community officials designated by the President, and by the Attorney General, the Deputy 
Attorney General, or an official designated by the Attorney General. 
The general guidance of the FBI's foreign intelligence collection activities by DNI- 
authorized requirements does not, however, limit the FBI's authority to -conduct investigations 
supportable on the basis of its other authorities -to investigate federal crimes and threats to the 
national security -in areas in which the information sought also falls under the definition of 
foreign intelligence. The FBI conducts investigations of federal crimes and threats to the 
national security based on priorities and strategic objectives set by the Department of Justice and 
the FBI, independent of DNI-established foreign intelligence collection requirements. 
Since the authority to collect foreign intelligence enables the FBI to obtain information 
pertinent to the United States' conduct of its foreign affairs, even if that information is not related 
to criminal activity or threats to the national security, the information so gathered may concern 
lawful activities. The FBI should accordingly operate openly and consensually with U.S. persons 
to the extent practicable when collecting foreign intelligence that does not concern criminal 
activities or threats to the national security. 
B. THE FBI AS AN INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
The FBI is an intelligence agency as well as a law enforcement agency. Its basic 
functions accordingly extend beyond limited investigations of discrete matters, and include 
broader analytic and planning functions. The FBI's responsibilities in this area derive fkom 
various administrative and statutory sources. See, e.g., E.O. 12333; 28 U.S.C. 532 note 
(incorporating P.L. 108-458 $5 2001 -2003) and 534 note (incorporating P.L. 109-1 62 8 1 107). 
Enhancement of the FBI's intelligence analysis capabilities and functions has consistently been 
recognized as a key priority in the legislative and administrative reform efforts following the 
September 1 1,2001, terrorist attacks: 
[Counterterrorism] strategy should . . . encompass specific efforts to . . .enhance the 
depth and quality of domestic intelligence collection and analysis . . . . [Tlhe FBI should 
strengthen and improve its domestic [intelligence] capability as fully and expeditiously as 
possible by immediately instituting measures to . . . significantly improve strategic 
analytical capabilities . . . . (Joint Inquiry into Intelligence Community Activities Before 
and After the Terrorist Attacks of September 11,2001, S. Rep. No. 351 & H.R. Rep. No. 
792, 107th Cong., 2d Sess. 4-7 (2002) (errata print).) 
A "smart" government would integrate all sources of information to see the enemy as a 
whole. Integrated all-source analysis should also inform and shape strategies to collect 
more intelligence. . . . The importance of integrated, all-source analysis cannot be 
overstated. Without it, it is not possible to "connect the dots." (Final Report of the 
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States 401,408 (2004).) 
Part IV of these Guidelines accordingly authorizes the FBI to engage in intelligence 
analysis and planning, drawing on all lawful sources of information. The functions authorized 
under that Part include: (i) development of overviews and analyses concerning threats to and 
vulnerabilities of the United States and its interests, (ii) research and analysis to produce reports 
and assessments concerning matters relevant to investigative activities or other authorized FBI 
activities, and (iii) the operation of intelligence systems that facilitate and support investigations 
through the compilation and analysis of data and information on an ongoing basis. 
C. OVERSIGHT 
The activities authorized by these Guidelines must be conducted in a manner consistent 
with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies, including those protecting privacy and civil 
liberties. The Justice Department's National Security Division and the FBI's Inspection 
Division, Office of General Counsel, and Office of Integrity and Compliance, along with other 
components, share the responsibility to ensure that the Department meets these goals with respect 
to national security and foreign intelligence matters. In particular, the National Security 
Division's Oversight Section, in conjunction with the FBI's Office of General Counsel, is 
responsible for conducting regular reviews of all aspects of FBI national security and foreign 
intelligence activities. These reviews, conducted at FBI field offices and headquarter units, 
broadly examine such activities for compliance with these Guidelines and other applicable 
requirements. 
Various features of these Guidelines facilitate the National Security Division's oversight 
functions. Relevant requirements and provisions include: (i) required notification by the FBI to 
the National Security Division concerning full investigations that involve foreign intelligence 
collection or investigation of United States persons in relation to threats of the national security, 
(ii) annual reports by the FBI to the National Security Division concerning the FBI's foreign 
intelligence collection program, including information on the scope and nature of foreign 
intelligence collection activities in each FBI field office, and (iii) access by the National Security 
Division to information obtained by the FBI through national security or foreign intelligence 
activities and general authority for the Assistant Attorney General for National Security to obtain 
reports from the FBI concerning these activities. 
Pursuant to these Guidelines, other Attorney General guidelines, and institutional 
assignments of responsibility withn the Justice Department, additional Department components 
-including the Criminal Division, the United States Attorneys' Offices, and the Office of 
Privacy and Civil Liberties -are involved in the common endeavor with the FBI of ensuring that 
the activities of all Department components are lawful, appropriate, and ethxal as well as 
effective. Examples include the involvement of both FBI and prosecutorial personnel in the 
review of undercover operations involving sensitive circumstances, notice requirements for 
investigations involving sensitive investigative matters (as defined in Part V1I.N of these 
Guidelines), and notice and oversight provisions for enterprise investigations, which may involve 
a broad examination of groups implicated in the gravest criminal and national security threats. 
These requirements and procedures help to ensure that the rule of law is respected in the 
Department's activities and that public confidence is maintained in these activities. 
I. 	 GENERAL AUTHORITIES AND PRINCIPLES 
A. 	 SCOPE 
These Guidelines apply to investigative activities conducted by the FBI within the United 
States or outside the territories of all countries. They do not apply to investigative 
activities of the FBI in foreign countries, which are governed by the Attorney General's 
Guidelines for Extraterritorial FBI Operations. 
B. 	 GENERAL AUTHORITIES 
1. 	 The FBI is authorized to conduct investigations to detect, obtain information 
about, and prevent and protect against federal crimes and threats to the national 
security and to collect foreign intelligence, as provided in Part I1 of these 
Guidelines. 
2. 	 The FBI is authorized to provide investigative assistance to other federal agencies, 
state, local, or tribal agencies, and foreign agencies as provided in Part III of these 
Guidelines. 
3. 	 The FBI is authorized to conduct intelligence analysis and planning as provided in 
Part IV of these Guidelines. 
4. 	 The FBI is authorized to retain and share information obtained pursuant to these 
Guidelines as provided in Part VI of these Guidelines. 
C. 	 USE OF AUTHORITIES AND METHODS 
1. 	 Protection of the United States and Its People 
The FBI shall hlly utilize the authorities provided and the methods authorized by 
these Guidelines to protect the United States and its people from crimes in 
violation of federal law and threats to the national security, and to further the 
foreign intelligence objectives of the United States. 
2. 	 Choice of Methods 
a. 	 The conduct of investigations and other activities authorized by these 
Guidelines may present choices between the use of different investigative 
methods that are each operationally sound and effective, but that are more 
or less intrusive, considering such factors as the effect on the privacy and 
civil liberties of individuals and potential damage to reputation. The least 
intrusive method feasible is to be used in such situations. It is recognized, 
however, that the choice of methods is a matter of judgment. The FBI 
shall not hesitate to use any lawful method consistent with these 
Guidelines, even if intrusive, where the degree of intrusiveness is 
warranted in light of the seriousness of a criminal or national security 
threat or the strength of the information indicating its existence, or in light 
of the importance of foreign intelligence sought to the United States' 
interests. This point is to be particularly observed in investigations 
relating to terrorism. 
b. 	 United States persons shall be dealt with openly and consensually to the 
extent practicable when collecting foreign intelligence that does not 
concern criminal activities or threats to the national security. 
3. 	 Respect for Legal Rights 
All activities under these Guidelines must have a valid purpose consistent with 
these Guidelines, and must be carried out in conformity with the Constitution and 
all applicable statutes, executive orders, Department of Justice regulations and 
policies, and Attorney General guidelines. These Guidelines do not authorize 
investigating or collecting or maintaining information on United States persons 
solely for the purpose of monitoring activities protected by the First Amendment 
or the lawful exercise of other rights secured by the Constitution or laws of the 
United States. These Guidelines also do not authorize any conduct prohibited by 
the Guidance Regarding the Use of Race by Federal Law Enforcement Agencies. 
4. 	 Undisclosed Participation in Organizations 
Undisclosed participation in organizations in activities under these Guidelines 
shall be conducted in accordance with FBI policy approved by the Attorney 
General. 
5. 	 Maintenance of Records under the Privacy Act 
The Privacy Act restricts the maintenance of records relating to certain activities 
of individuals who are United States persons, with exceptions for circumstances 
in which the collection of such information is pertinent to and within the scope of 
an authorized law enforcement activity or is otherwise authorized by statute. 5 
U.S.C. 552a(e)(7). Activities authorized by these Guidelines are authorized law 
enforcement activities or activities for which there is otherwise statutory authority 
for purposes of the Privacy Act. These Guidelines, however, do not provide an 
exhaustive enumeration of authorized FBI law enforcement activities or FBI 
activities for which there is otherwise statutory authority, and no restriction is 
implied with respect to such activities carried out by the FBI pursuant to other 
authorities. Further questions about the application of the Privacy Act to 
authorized activities of the FBI should be addressed to the FBI Office of the 
General Counsel, the FBI Privacy and Civil Liberties Unit, or the Department of 
Justice Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties. 
D. 	 NATURE AND APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES 
1. 	 Repealers 
These Guidelines supersede the following guidelines, which are hereby repealed: 
a. 	 The Attorney General's Guidelines on General Crimes, Racketeering 
Enterprise and Terrorism Enterprise Investigations (May 30,2002) and all 
predecessor guidelines thereto. 
b. 	 The Attorney General's Guidelines for FBI National Security 
Investigations and Foreign Intelligence Collection (October 3 1,2003) and 
all predecessor guidelines thereto. 
c. 	 The Attorney General's Supplemental Guidelines for Collection, 
Retention, and Dissemination of Foreign Intelligence (November 29, 
2006). 
d. 	 The Attorney General Procedure for Reporting and Use of Information 
Concerning Violations of Law and Authorization for Participation in 
Otherwise Illegal Activity in FBI Foreign Intelligence, Counterintelligence 
or International Terrorism Intelligence Investigations (August 8, 1988). 
e. 	 The Attorney General's Guidelines for Reporting on Civil Disorders and 
Demonstrations Involving a Federal Interest (April 5, 1976). 
2. 	 Status as Internal Guidance 
These Guidelines are set forth solely for the purpose of internal Department of 
Justice guidance. They are not intended to, do not, and may not be relied upon to 
create any rights, substantive or procedural, enforceable by law by any party in 
any matter, civil or criminal, nor do they place any limitation on otherwise lawful 
investigative and litigative prerogatives of the Department of Justice. 
3. 	 Departures from the Guidelines 
Departures fiom these Guidelines must be approved by the Director of the FBI, by 
the Deputy Director of the FBI, or by an Executive Assistant Director designated 
14 
by the Director. If a departure is necessary without such prior approval because of 
the immediacy or gravity of a threat to the safety of persons or property or to the 
national security, the Director, the Deputy Director, or a designated Executive 
Assistant Director shall be notified as soon thereafter as practicable. The FBI 
shall provide timely written notice of departures fiom these Guidelines to the 
Criminal Division and the National Security Division, and those divisions shall 
notify the Attorney General and the Deputy Attorney General. Notwithstanding 
this paragraph, all activities in all circumstances must be carried out in a manner 
consistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States. 
4. Other Activities Not Limited 
These Guidelines apply to FBI activities as provided herein and do not limit other 
authorized activities of the FBI, such as the FBI's responsibilities to conduct 
background checks and inquiries concerning applicants and employees under 
federal personnel security programs, the FBI's maintenance and operation of 
national criminal records systems and preparation of national crime statistics, and 
the forensic assistance and administration functions of the FBI Laboratory. 
11. INVESTIGATIONS AND INTELLIGENCE GATHERING 
This Part of the Guidelines authorizes the FBI to conduct investigations to detect, obtain 
information about, and prevent and protect against federal crimes and threats to the national 
security and to collect foreign intelligence. 
When an authorized purpose exists, the focus of activities authorized by this Part may be 
whatever the circumstances warrant. The subject of such an activity may be, for example, a 
particular crime or threatened crime; conduct constituting a threat to the national security; an 
individual, group, or organization that may be involved in criminal or national security- 
threatening conduct; or a topical matter of foreign intelligence interest. 
Investigations may also be undertaken for protective purposes in relation to individuals, 
groups, or other entities that may be targeted for criminal victimization or acquisition, or for 
terrorist attack or other depredations by the enemies of the United States. For example, the 
participation of the FBI in special events management, in relation to public events or other 
activities whose character may make them attractive targets for terrorist attack, is an authorized 
exercise of the authorities conveyed by these Guidelines. Likewise, FBI counterintelligence 
activities directed to identifying and securing facilities, personnel, or information that may be 
targeted for infiltration, recruitment, or acquisition by foreign intelligence services are authorized 
exercises of the authorities conveyed by these Guidelines. 
The identification and recruitment of human sources -who may be able to provide or 
obtain information relating to criminal activities, information relating to terrorism, espionage, or 
other threats to the national security, or information relating to matters of foreign intelligence 
interest -is also critical to the effectiveness of the FBI's law enforcement, national security, and 
intelligence programs, and activities undertaken for this purpose are authorized and encouraged. 
The scope of authorized activities under this Part is not limited to "investigation" in a 
narrow sense, such as solving particular cases or obtaining evidence for use in particular criminal 
prosecutions. Rather, these activities also provide critical information needed for broader 
analytic and intelligence purposes to facilitate the solution and prevention of crime, protect the 
national security, and further foreign intelligence objectives. These purposes include use of the 
information in intelligence analysis and planning under Part IV, and dissemination of the 
information to other law enforcement, Intelligence Community, and White House agencies under 
Part VI. Information obtained at all stages of investigative activity is accordingly to be retained 
and disseminated for these purposes as provided in these Guidelines, or in FBI policy consistent 
with these Guidelines, regardless of whether it furthers investigative objectives in a narrower or 
more immediate sense. 
In the course of activities under these Guidelines, the FBI may incidentally obtain 
information relating to matters outside of its areas of primary investigative responsibility. For 
example, information relating to violations of state or local law or foreign law may be 
incidentally obtained in the course of investigating federal crimes or threats to the national 
security or in collecting foreign intelligence. These Guidelines do not bar the acquisition of such 
information in the course of authorized investigative activities, the retention of such information, 
or its dissemination as appropriate to the responsible authorities in other agencies or 
jurisdictions. Part VI of these Guidelines includes specific authorizations and requirements for 
sharing such information with relevant agencies and officials. 
This Part authorizes different levels of information gathering activity, which afford the 
FBI flexibility, under appropriate standards and procedures, to adapt the methods utilized and the 
information sought to the nature of the matter under investigation and the character of the 
information supporting the need for investigation. 
Assessments, authorized by Subpart A of this Part, require an authorized purpose but not 
any particular factual predication. For example, to carry out its central mission of preventing the 
commission of terrorist acts against the United States and its people, the FBI must proactively 
draw on available sources of information to identifl terrorist threats and activities. It cannot be 
content to wait for leads to come in through the actions of others, but rather must be vigilant in 
detecting terrorist activities to the full extent permitted by law, with an eye towards early 
intervention and prevention of acts of terrorism before they occur. Likewise, in the exercise of 
its protective functions, the FBI is not constrained to wait until information is received indicating 
that a particular event, activity, or facility has drawn the attention of those who would threaten 
the national security. Rather, the FBI must take the initiative to secure and protect activities and 
entities whose character may make them attractive targets for terrorism or espionage. The 
proactive investigative authority conveyed in assessments is designed for, and may be utilized by, 
the FBI in the discharge of these responsibilities. For example, assessments may be conducted as 
part of the FBI's special events management activities. 
More broadly, detecting and interrupting criminal activities at their early stages, and 
preventing crimes from occurring in the first place, is preferable to allowing criminal plots and 
activities to come to fruition. Hence, assessments may be undertaken proactively with such 
objectives as detecting criminal activities; obtaining information on individuals, groups, or 
organizations of possible investigative interest, either because they may be involved in criminal 
or national security-threatening activities or because they may be targeted for attack or 
victimization by such activities; and identifying and assessing individuals who may have value as 
human sources. For example, assessment activities may involve proactively surfing the Internet 
to find publicly accessible websites and services through which recruitment by terrorist 
organizations and promotion of terrorist crimes is openly taking place; through which child 
pornography is advertised and traded; through which efforts are made by sexual predators to lure 
children for purposes of sexual abuse; or through which fraudulent schemes are perpetrated 
against the public. , 
The methods authorized in assessments are generally those of relatively low 
intrusiveness, such as obtaining publicly available information, checking government records, 
and requesting information fiom members of the public. These Guidelines do not impose 
supervisory approval requirements in assessments, given the types of techniques that are 
authorized at this stage (e.g., perusing the Internet for publicly available information). However, 
FBI policy will prescribe supervisory approval requirements for certain assessments, considering 
such matters as the purpose of the assessment and the methods being utilized. 
Beyond the proactive information gathering functions described above, assessments may 
be used when allegations or other information concerning crimes or threats to the national 
security is received or obtained, and the matter can be checked out or resolved through the 
relatively non-intrusive methods authorized in assessments. The checking of investigative leads 
in this manner can avoid the need to proceed to more formal levels of investigative activity, if the 
results of an assessment indicate that further investigation is not warranted. 
Subpart B of this Part authorizes a second level of investigative activity, predicated 
investigations. The purposes or objectives of predicated investigations are essentially the same 
as those of assessments, but predication as provided in these Guidelines is needed -generally, 
allegations, reports, facts or circumstances indicative of possible criminal or national security- 
threatening activity, or the potential for acquiring information responsive to foreign intelligence 
requirements -and supervisory approval must be obtained, to initiate predicated investigations. 
Corresponding to the stronger predication and approval requirements, all lawful methods may be 
used in predicated investigations. A classified directive provides further specification concerning 
circumstances supporting certain predicated investigations. 
Predicated investigations that concern federal crimes or threats to the national security are 
subdivided into preliminary investigations and full investigations. Preliminary investigations 
may be initiated on the basis of any allegation or information indicative of possible criminal or 
national security-threatening activity, but more substantial factual predication is required for full 
investigations. Wle time limits are set for the completion of preliminary investigations, full 
investigations may be pursued without preset limits on their duration. 
The final investigative category under this Part of the Guidelines is enterprise 
investigations, authorized by Subpart C, which permit a general examination of the structure, 
scope, and nature of certain groups and organizations. Enterprise investigations are a type of full 
investigations. Hence, they are subject to the purpose, approval, and predication requirements 
that apply to full investigations, and all lawful methods may be used in carrying them out. The 
distinctive characteristic of enterprise investigations is that they concern groups or organizations 
that may be involved in the most serious criminal or national security threats to the public -
generally, patterns of racketeering activity, terrorism or other threats to the national security, or 
the commission of offenses characteristically involved in terrorism as described in 18 U.S.C. 
2332b(g)(5)(B). A broad examination of the characteristics of groups satisfying these criteria is 
authorized in enterprise investigations, including any relationshp of the group to a foreign 
power, its size and composition, its geographic dimensions and finances, its past acts and goals, 
and its capacity for harm. 
A. ASSESSMENTS 
1. 	 Purposes 
Assessments may be canied out to detect, obtain information about, or prevent or 
protect against federal crimes or threats to the national security or to collect 
foreign intelligence. 
2. 	 Approval 
The conduct of assessments is subject to any supervisory approval requirements 
prescribed by FBI policy. 
3. 	 Authorized Activities 
Activities that may be canied out for the purposes described in paragraph 1.in an 
assessment include: 
a. 	 seeking information, proactively or in response to investigative leads, 
relating to: 
i. 	 activities constituting violations of federal criminal law or threats 
to the national security, 
.. 
11. 	 the involvement or role of individuals, groups, or organizations in 
such activities; or 
. . . 
111. 	 matters of foreign intelligence interest responsive to foreign 
intelligence requirements; 
b. 	 identifying and obtaining information about potential targets of or 
vulnerabilities to criminal activities in violation of federal law or threats to 
the national security; 
c. 	 seeking information to identifl potential human sources, assess the 
suitability, credibility, or value of individuals as human sources, validate 
human sources, or maintain the cover or credibility of human sources, who 
may be able to provide or obtain information relating to criminal activities 
in violation of federal law, threats to the national security, or matters of 
foreign intelligence interest; and 
d. 	 obtaining information to inform or facilitate intelligence analysis and 
planning as described in Part IV of these Guidelines. 
4. Authorized Methods 
Only the following methods may be used in assessments: 
a. 	 Obtain publicly available information. 
b. 	 Access and examine FBI and other Department of Justice records, and 
obtain information from any FBI or other Department of Justice personnel. 
c. 	 Access and examine records maintained by, and request information fkom, 
other federal, state, local, or tribal, or foreign governmental entities or 
agencies. 
d. 	 Use online services and resources (whether nonprofit or commercial). 
e. 	 Use and recruit human sources in conformity with the Attorney General's 
Guidelines Regarding the Use of FBI Confidential Human Sources. 
f. 	 Interview or request information from members of the public and private 
entities. 
g. 	 Accept information voluntarily provided by governmental or private 
entities. 
h. 	 Engage in observation or surveillance not requiring a court order. 
1. 	 Grand jury subpoenas for telephone or electronic mail subscriber 
information. 
B. 	 PREDICATED INVESTIGATIONS 
1. 	 Purposes 
.Predicated investigations may be carried out to detect, obtain information about, 
or prevent or protect against federal crimes or threats to the national security or to 
collect foreign intelligence. 
2. 	 Approval 
The initiation of a predicated investigation requires supervisory approval at a level 
or levels specified by FBI policy. A predicated investigation based on paragraph 
3.c. (relating to foreign intelligence) must be approved by a Special Agent in 
Charge or by an FBI Headquarters official as provided in such policy. 
3. 	 Circumstances Warranting Investigation 
A predicated investigation may be initiated on the basis of any of the following 
circumstances: 
a. 	 An activity constituting a federal crime or a threat to the national security 
has or may have occurred, is or may be occurring, or will or may occur and 
the investigation may obtain information relating to the activity or the 
involvement or role of an individual, group, or organization in such 
activity. 
b. 	 An individual, group, organization, entity, information, property, or 
activity is or may be a target of attack, victimization, acquisition, 
infiltration, or recruitment in connection with criminal activity in violation 
of federal law or a threat to the national security and the investigation may 
obtain information that would help to protect against such activity or 
threat. 
c. 	 The investigation may obtain foreign intelligence that is responsive to a 
foreign intelligence requirement. 
4. 	 Preliminary and Full Investigations 
A predicated investigation relating to a federal crime or threat to the national 
security may be conducted as a preliminary investigation or a full investigation. A 
predicated investigation that is based solely on the authority to collect foreign 
intelligence may be conducted only as a full investigation. 
a. 	 Preliminary investigations 
i. Predication Required for Preliminary Investigations 
A preliminary investigation may be initiated on the basis of 
information or an allegation indicating the existence of a 
circumstance described in paragraph 3.a.-.b. 
ii. 	 Duration of Preliminary Investigations 
A preliminary investigation must be concluded within six months 
of its initiation, which may be extended by up to six months by the 
Special Agent in Charge. Extensions of preliminary investigations 
beyond a year must be approved by FBI Headquarters. 
iii. Methods Allowed in Preliminary Investigations 
All lawful methods may be used in a preliminary investigation 
except for methods within the scope of Part V.A. 1 1 .-.13. of these 
Guidelines. 
s 
b. 	 Full Investigations 
i. 	 Predication Required for Full Investigations 
A full investigation may be initiated if there is an articulable 
factual basis for the investigation that reasonably indicates that a 
circumstance described in paragraph 3 .a.-.b. exists or if a 
circumstance described in paragraph 3 .c. exists. 
ii. 	 Methods Allowed in Full Investigations 
All lawful methods may be used in a full investigation. 
5. 	 Notice Requirements 
a. 	 An FBI field office shall notify FBI Headquarters and the United States 
Attorney or other appropriate Department of Justice official of the 
initiation by the field office of a predicated investigation involving a 
sensitive investigative matter. If the investigation is initiated by FBI 
Headquarters, FBI Headquarters shall notify the United States Attorney or 
other appropriate Department of Justice official of the initiation of such an 
investigation. If the investigation concerns a threat to the national 
security, an official of the National Security Division must be notified. 
The notice shall identify all sensitive investigative matters involved in the 
investigation. 
b. 	 The FBI shall notify the National Security Division of: 
1. 	 the initiation of any full investigation of a United States person 
relating to a threat to the national security; and 
. . 
11. 	 the initiation of any full investigation that is based on paragraph 
3.c. (relating to foreign intelligence). 
c. 	 The notifications under subparagraphs a. and b. shall be made as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 30 days after the initiation of an 
investigation. 
d. 	 The FBI shall notify the Deputy Attorney General if FBI Headquarters 
disapproves a field office's initiation of a predicated investigation relating 
to a threat to the national security on the ground that the predication for the 
investigation is insufficient. 
ENTERPRISE INVESTIGATIONS 
1. 	 Definition 
A full investigation of a group or organization may be initiated as an enterprise 
investigation if there is an articulable factual basis for the investigation that 
reasonably indicates that the group or organization may have engaged or may be 
engaged in, or may have or may be engaged in planning or preparation or 
provision of support for: 
a. 	 a pattern of racketeering activity as defined in 18 U.-S.C. 1961 (5); 
b. 	 international terrorism or other threat to the national security; 
c. 	 domestic terrorism as defined in 18 U.S.C. 2331(5) involving a violation 
of federal criminal law; 
d. 	 fiu-thering political or social goals wholly or in part through activities that 
involve force or violence and a violation of federal criminal law; or 
e. 	 an offense described in 18 U.S.C. 2332b(g)(5)(B) or 18 U.S.C. 43. 
2. 	 Scope 
The information sought in an enterprise investigation may include a general 
examination of the structure, scope, and nature of the group or organization 
including: its relationship, if any, to a foreign power; the identity and relationship 
of its members, employees, or other persons who may be acting in furtherance of 
its objectives; its finances and resources; its geographical dimensions; and its past 
and future activities and goals. 
3. 	 Notice and Reporting Requirements 
a. 	 The responsible Department of Justice component for the purpose of 
notification and reports in enterprise investigations is the National Security 
Division, except that, for the purpose of notifications and reports in an 
enterprise investigation relating to a pattern of racketeering activity that 
does not involve an offense or offenses described in 18 U.S.C. 
2332b(g)(5)(B), the responsible Department of Justice component is the 
Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal Division. 
b. An FBI field office shall notify FBI Headquarters of the initiation by the 
field office of an enterprise investigation. 
c. The FBI shall notify the National Security Division or the Organized 
Crime and Racketeering Section of the initiation of an enterprise 
investigation, whether by a field office or by FBI Headquarters, and the 
component so notified shall notify the Attorney General and the Deputy 
Attorney General. The FBI shall also notify any relevant United States 
Attorney's Office, except that any investigation within the scope of Part 
V1.D.1.d of these Guidelines (relating to counterintelligence 
investigations) is to be treated as provided in that provision. Notifications 
by the FBI under this subparagraph shall be provided as soon as 
practicable, but no later than 30 days after the initiation of the 
investigation. 
d. The Assistant Attorney General for National Security or the Chief of the 
Organized Crime and Racketeering Section, as appropriate, may at any 
time request the FBI to provide a report on the status of an enterprise 
investigation and the FBI will provide such reports as requested. 
111. ASSISTANCE TO OTHER AGENCIES 
The FBI is authorized to provide investigative assistance to other federal, state, local, or 
tribal, or foreign agencies as provided in ths Part. 
The investigative assistance authorized by this Part is often concerned with the same 
objectives as those identified in Part II of these Guidelines -investigating federal crimes and 
threats to the national security, and collecting foreign intelligence. In some cases, however, 
investigative assistance to other agencies is legally authorized for purposes other than those 
identified in Part II, such as assistance in certain contexts to state or local agencies in the 
investigation of crimes under state or local law, see 28 U.S.C. 540, 540A, 540B, and assistance 
to foreign agencies in the investigation of foreign law violations pursuant to international 
agreements. Investigative assistance for such legally authorized purposes is permitted under this 
Part, even if it is not for purposes identified as grounds for investigation under Part II. 
The authorities provided by this Part are cumulative to Part II and do not limit the FBI's 
investigative activities under Part II. For example, Subpart B.2 in this Part authorizes 
investigative activities by the FBI in certain circumstances to inform decisions by the President 
concerning the deployment of troops to deal with civil disorders, and Subpart B.3 authorizes 
investigative activities to facilitate demonstrations and related public health and safety measures. 
The requirements and limitations in these provisions for conducting investigations for the 
specified purposes do not limit the FBI's authority under Part II to investigate federal crimes or 
threats to the national security that occur in the context of or in connection with civil disorders or 
demonstrations. 
A. THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY 
The FBI may provide investigative assistance (including operational support) to 
authorized intelligence activities of other Intelligence Community agencies. 
B. FEDERAL AGENCIES GENERALLY 
1. In General 
The FBI may provide assistance to any federal agency in the investigation of 
federal crimes or threats to the national security or in the collection of foreign 
intelligence, and investigative assistance to any federal agency for any other 
purpose that may be legally authoized, including investigative assistance to the 
Secret Service in support of its protective responsibilities. 
2. The President in Relation to Civil Disorders 
a. At the direction of the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, or 
25 
the Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Division, the FBI shall 
collect information relating to actual or threatened civil disorders to assist 
the President in determining (pursuant to the authority of the President 
under 10 U.S.C. 331-33) whether use of the armed forces or militia is 
required and how a decision to commit troops should be implemented. 
The information sought shall concern such matters as: 
1. 	 The size of the actual or threatened disorder, both in number of 
people involved or affected and in geographic area. 
. . 
11. 	 The potential for violence. 
iii. 	 The potential for expansion of the disorder in light of community 
conditions and underlying causes of the disorder. 
iv. 	 The relationship of the actual or threatened disorder to the 
enforcement of federal law or court orders and the likelihood that 
state or local authorities will assist in enforcing those laws or 
orders. 
v. 	 The extent of state or local resources available to handle the 
disorder. 
b. 	 Investigations under this paragraph will be authorized only for a period of 
30 days, but the authorization may be renewed for subsequent 30 day 
periods. 
c. 	 Notwithstanding Subpart E.2 of this Part, the methods that may be used in 
an investigation under ths paragraph are those described in subparagraphs 
a.-.d., subparagraph f. (other than pretext interviews or requests), or 
subparagraph g. of Part II.A.4 of these Guidelines. The Attorney General, 
. 	the Deputy Attorney General, or the Assistant Attorney General for the 
Criminal Division may also authorize the use of other methods described 
in Part II.A.4. 
Public Health and Safety Authorities in Relation to Demonstrations 
a. 	 At the direction of the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, or 
the Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Division, the FBI shall 
collect information relating to demonstration activities that are likely to 
require the federal government to take action to facilitate the activities and 
provide public health and safety measures with respect to those activities. 
The information sought in such an investigation shall be that needed to 
facilitate an adequate federal response to ensure public health and safety 
and to protect the exercise of First Amendment rights, such as: 
1. 	 The time, place, and type of activities planned. 
.. 
11. 	 The number of persons expected to participate. 
... 
111. 	 The expected means and routes of travel for participants and 
expected time of arrival. 
iv. 	 Any plans for lodging or housing of participants in connection with 
the demonstration. 
b. 	 Notwithstanding Subpart E.2 of this Part, the methods that may be used in 
an investigation under this paragraph are those described in subparagraphs 
a.-.d., subparagraph f. (other than pretext interviews or requests), or 
subparagraph g. of Part II.A.4 of these Guidelines. The Attorney General, 
the Deputy Attorney General, or the Assistant Attorney General for the 
Criminal Division may also authorize the use of other methods described 
in Part II.A.4. 
C. 	 STATE, LOCAL, OR TRIBAL AGENCIES 
The FBI may provide investigative assistance to state, local, or tribal agencies in the 
investigation of matters that may involve federal crimes or threats to the national security, 
or for such other purposes as may be legally authorized. 
D. 	 FOREIGN AGENCIES 
1. 	 At the request of foreign law enforcement, intelligence, or security agencies, the 
FBI may conduct investigations or provide assistance to investigations by such 
agencies, consistent with the interests of the United States (including national 
security interests) and with due consideration of the effect on any United States 
person. Investigations or assistance under this paragraph must be approved as 
provided by FBI policy. The FBI shall notify the National Security Division 
concerning investigation or assistance under this paragraph where: (i) FBI 
Headquarters approval for the activity is required pursuant to the approval policy 
adopted by the FBI for purposes of this paragraph, and (ii) the activity relates to a 
threat to the national security. Notification to the National Security Division shall 
be made as soon as practicable but no later than 30 days after the approval. 
Provisions regarding notification to or coordination with the Central Intelligence 
Agency by the FBI in memoranda of understanding or agreements with the 
Central Intelligence Agency may also apply to activities under this paragraph. 
2. 	 The FBI may not provide assistance to foreign law enforcement, intelligence, or 
security officers conducting investigations within the United States unless such 
officers have provided prior notification to the Attorney General as required by 18 
U.S.C. 951. 
3. 	 The FBI may conduct background inquiries concerning consenting individuals 
when requested by foreign government agencies. 
4. 	 The FBI may provide other material and technical assistance to foreign 
governments to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law. 
E. 	 APPLICABLE STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES 
1. 	 Authorized investigative assistance by the FBI to other agencies under this Part 
includes joint operations and activities with such agencies. 
2. 	 All lawful methods may be used in investigative assistance activities under this 
Part. 
3. 	 Where the methods used in investigative assistance activities under this Part go 
beyond the methods authorized in assessments under Part II.A.4 of these 
Guidelines, the following apply: 
a. 	 Supervisory approval must be obtained for the activity at a level or levels 
specified in FBI policy. 
b. 	 Notice must be provided concerning sensitive investigative matters in the 
manner described in Part II.B.5. 
c. 	 A database or records system must be maintained that permits, with 
respect to each such activity, the prompt retrieval of the status of the 
activity (open or closed), the dates of opening and closing, and the basis 
for the activity. This database or records system may be combined with 
the database or records system for predicated investigations required by 
Part VI.A.2. 
IV. INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS AND PLANNING 
The FBI is authorized to engage in analysis and planning. The FBI's analytic activities 
enable the FBI to identify and understand trends, causes, and potential indicia of criminal activity 
and other threats to the United States that would not be apparent from the investigation of 
discrete matters alone. By means of intelligence analysis and strategic planning, the FBI can 
more effectively discover crimes, threats to the national security, and other matters of national 
intelligence interest and can provide the critical support needed for the effective discharge of its 
investigative responsibilities and other authorized activities. For example, analysis of threats in 
the context of special events management, concerning public events or activities that may be 
targeted for terrorist attack, is an authorized activity under this Part. 
In carrying out its intelligence functions under this Part, the FBI is authorized to draw on 
all lawful sources of information, including but not limited to the results of investigative 
activities under these Guidelines. Investigative activities under these Guidelines and other 
legally authorized activities through which the FBI acquires information, data, or intelligence 
may properly be utilized, structured, and prioritized so as to support and effectuate the FBI's 
intelligence mission. The remainder of this Part provides further specification concerning 
activities and functions authorized as part of that mission. 
A. STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS 
The FBI is authorized to develop overviews and analyses of threats to and vulnerabilities 
of the United States and its interests in areas related to the FBI's responsibilities, 
including domestic and international criminal threats and activities; domestic and 
international activities, circumstances, and developments affecting the national security; 
and matters relevant to the conduct of the United States' foreign affairs. The overviews 
and analyses prepared under this Subpart may encompass present, emergent, and potential 
threats and vulnerabilities, their contexts and causes, and identification and analysis of 
means of responding to them. 
B. REPORTS AND ASSESSMENTS GENERALLY 
The FBI is authorized to conduct research, analyze information, and prepare reports and 
assessments concerning matters relevant to authorized FBI activities, such as reports and 
assessments concerning: types of criminals or criminal activities; organized crime groups; 
terrorism, espionage, or other threats to the national security; foreign intelligence matters; 
or the scope and nature of criminal activity in particular geographic areas or sectors of the 
economy. 
C. INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS 
The FBI is authorized to operate intelligence, identification, tracking, and information 
systems in support of authorized investigative activities, or for such other or additional 
purposes as may be legally authorized, such as intelligence and tracking systems relating 
to terrorists, gangs, or organized crime groups. 
V. AUTHORIZED METHODS 
A. 	 PARTICULAR METHODS 
All lawful investigative methods may be used in activities under these Guidelines as 
authorized by these Guidelines. Authorized methods include, but are not limited to, those 
identified in the following list. The methods identified in the list are in some instances subject to 
special restrictions or review or approval requirements as noted: 
1. 	 The methods described in Part II.A.4 of these Guidelines. 
2. 	 Mail covers. 
3. 	 Physical searches of personal or real property where a warrant or court order is not 
legally required because there is no reasonable expectation of privacy (e.g., trash 
covers). 
4. 	 Consensual monitoring of communications, including consensual computer 
monitoring, subject to legal review by the Chief Division Counsel or the FBI 
Office of the General Counsel. Where a sensitive monitoring circumstance is 
involved, the monitoring must be approved by the Criminal Division or, if the 
investigation concerns a threat to the national security or foreign intelligence, by 
the National Security Division. 
5. 	 Use of closed-circuit television, direction finders, and other monitoring devices, 
subject to legal review by the Chief Division Counsel or the FBI Office of the 
General Counsel. (The methods described in this paragraph usually do not require 
court orders or warrants unless they involve physical trespass or non-consensual 
monitoring of communications, but legal review is necessary to ensure 
compliance with all applicable legal requirements.) 
6. 	 Polygraph examinations. 
7. 	 Undercover operations. In investigations relating to activities in violation of 
federal criminal law that do not concern threats to the national security or foreign 
intelligence, undercover operations must be carried out in conformity with the 
Attorney General's Guidelines on Federal Bureau of Investigation Undercover 
Operations. In investigations that are not subject to the preceding sentence 
because they concern threats to the national security or foreign intelligence, 
undercover operations involving religious or political organizations must be 
reviewed and approved by FBI Headquarters, with participation by the National 
Security Division in the review process. 
8. 	 Compulsory process as authorized by law, including grand jury subpoenas and 
other subpoenas, National Security Letters (1 5 U.S.C. 168 lu, 168 1v; 18 U.S.C. 
2709; 12 U.S.C. 3414(a)(5)(A); 50 U.S.C. 436), and Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act orders for the production of tangible things (50 U.S.C. 1861-63). 
9. 	 Accessing stored wire and electronic communications and transactional records in 
conformity with chapter 121 of title 18, United States Code (18 U.S.C. 2701- 
2712). 
10. 	 Use of pen registers and trap and trace devices in conformity with chapter 206 of 
title 18, United States Code (1 8 U.S.C. 3 121-3 127), or the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act (50 U.S.C. 1841 -1 846). 
1 1. 	 Electronic surveillance in conformity with chapter 1 19 of title 18, United States 
Code (18 U.S.C. 2510-2522), the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or 
Executive Order 12333 5 2.5. 
12. 	 Physical searches, including mail openings, in conformity with Rule 41 of the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or 
Executive Order 12333 5 2.5. A classified directive provides additional limitation 
on certain searches. 
13. 	 Acquisition of foreign intelligence information in conformity with title VII of the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. 
B. 	 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 
Beyond the limitations noted in the'list above relating to particular investigative methods, 
the following requirements are to be observed: 
1. 	 Contacts with Represented Persons 
Contact with represented persons may implicate legal restrictions and affect the 
admissibility of resulting evidence. Hence, if an individual is known to be 
represented by counsel in a particular matter, the FBI will follow applicable law 
and Department procedure concerning contact with represented individuals in the 
absence of prior notice to counsel. The Special Agent in Charge and the United 
States Attorney or their designees shall consult periodically on applicable law and 
Department procedure. Where issues arise concerning the consistency of contacts 
with represented persons with applicable attorney conduct rules, the United States 
Attorney's Office should consult with the Professional Responsibility Advisory 
Office. 
2. Use of Classified Investigative Technologies 
Inappropriate use of classified investigative technologies may risk the 
compromise of such technologies. Hence, in an investigation relating to activities 
in violation of federal criminal law that does not concern a threat to the national 
security or foreign intelligence, the use of such technologies must be in 
conformity with the Procedures for the Use of Classified Investigative 
Technologies in Criminal Cases. 
C. 	 OTHERWISE ILLEGAL ACTIVITY 
1. 	 Otherwise illegal activity by an FBI agent or employee in an undercover operation 
relating to activity in violation of federal criminal law that does not concern a 
threat to the national security or foreign intelligence must be approved in 
conformity with the Attorney General's Guidelines on Federal Bureau of 
Investigation Undercover Operations. Approval of otherwise illegal activity in 
conformity with those guidelines is sufficient and satisfies any approval 
requirement that would otherwise apply under these Guidelines. 
2. 	 Otherwise illegal activity by a human source must be approved in conformity with 
the Attorney General's Guidelines Regarding the Use of FBI Confidential Human 
Sources. 
3. 	 Otherwise illegal activity by an FBI agent or employee that is not within the scope 
of paragraph 1.must be approved by a United States Attorney's Office or a 
Department of Justice Division, except that a Special Agent in Charge may 
authorize the following: 
a. 	 otherwise illegal activity that would not be a felony under federal, state, 
local, or tribal law; 
b. 	 consensual monitoring of communications, even if a crime under state, 
local, or tribal law; 
c. 	 the controlled purchase, receipt, delivery, or sale of drugs, stolen property, 
or other contraband; 
d. 	 the payment of bribes; 
e. 	 the making of false representations in concealment of personal identity or 
the true ownership of a proprietary; and 
f. 	 conducting a money laundering transaction or transactions involving an 
aggregate amount not exceeding $1 million. 
However, in an investigation relating to a threat to the national security or foreign 
intelligence collection, a Special Agent in Charge may not authorize an activity 
that may constitute a violation of export control laws or laws that concern the 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. In such an investigation, a Special 
Agent in Charge may authorize an activity that may otherwise violate prohibitions 
of material support to terrorism only in accordance with standards established by 
the Director of the FBI and agreed to by the Assistant Attorney General for 
National Security. 
4. 	 The following activities may not be authorized: 
a. 	 Acts of violence. 
b. 	 Activities whose authorization is prohibited by law, including unlawful 
investigative methods, such as illegal electronic surveillance or illegal 
searches. 
Subparagraph a., however, does not limit the right of FBI agents or employees to 
engage in any lawful use of force, including the use of force in self-defense or 
defense of others or otherwise in the lawful discharge of their duties. 
5. 	 An agent or employee may engage in otherwise illegal activity that could be 
authorized under this Subpart without the authorization required by paragraph 3. if 
necessary to meet an immediate threat to the safety of persons or property or to the 
national security, or to prevent the compromise of an investigation or the loss of a 
significant investigative opportunity. In such a case, prior to engaging in the 
otherwise illegal activity, every effort should be made by the agent or employee to 
consult with the Special Agent in Charge, and by the Special Agent in Charge to 
consult with the United States Attorney's Office or appropriate Department of 
Justice Division where the authorization of that office or division would be 
required under paragraph 3., unless the circumstances preclude such consultation. 
Cases in which otherwise illegal activity occurs pursuant to this paragraph without 
the authorization required by paragraph 3. shall be reported as soon as possible to 
the Special Agent in Charge, and by the Special Agent in Charge to FBI 
Headquarters and to the United States Attorney's Office or appropriate 
Department of Justice Division. 
6. 	 In an investigation relating to a threat to the national security or foreign 
intelligence collection, the National Security Division is the approving component 
for otherwise illegal activity for which paragraph 3. requires approval beyond 
internal FBI approval. However, officials in other components may approve 
otherwise illegal activity in such investigations as authorized by the Assistant 
Attorney General for National Security. 
VI. RETENTION AND SHARING OF INFORMATION 
A. 	 RETENTION OF INFORMATION 
1. 	 The FBI shall retain records relating to activities under these Guidelines in 
accordance with a records retention plan approved by the National Archives and 
Records Administration. 
2. 	 The FBI shall maintain a database or records system that permits, with respect to 
each predicated investigation, the prompt retrieval of the status of the 
investigation (open or closed), the dates of opening and closing, and the basis for 
the investigation. 
B. 	 INFORMATION SHARING GENERALLY 
1. 	 Permissive Sharing 
Consistent with law and with any applicable agreements or understandings with 
other agencies concerning the dissemination 'of information they have provided, 
the FBI may disseminate information obtained or produced through activities 
under these Guidelines: 
a. 	 within the FBI and to other components of the Department of Justice; 
b. 	 to other federal, state, local, or tribal agencies if related to their 
responsibilities and, in relation to other Intelligence Community agencies, 
the determination whether the information is related to the recipient's 
responsibilities may be left to the recipient; 
c. 	 to congressional committees as authorized by the Department of Justice 
Office of Legislative Affairs; 
d. 	 to foreign agencies if the information is related to their responsibilities and 
the dissemination is consistent with the interests of the United States 
(including national security interests) and the FBI has considered the effect 
such dissemination may reasonably be expected to have on any identifiable 
United States person; 
e. 	 if the information is publicly available, does not identify United States 
persons, or is disseminated with the consent of the person whom it 
concerns; 
f. 	 if the dissemination is necessary to protect the safety or security of persons 
or property, to protect against or prevent a crime or threat to the national 
security, or to obtain information for the conduct of an authorized FBI 
investigation; or 
g. 	 if dissemination of the information is otherwise permitted by the Privacy 
Act (5 U.S.C. 552a). 
2. 	 Required Sharing 
The FBI shall share and disseminate information as required by statutes, treaties, 
Executive Orders, Presidential directives, National Security Council directives, 
Homeland Security Council directives, and Attorney General-approved policies, 
memoranda of understanding, or agreements. 
INFORMATION RELATING TO CRIMINAL MATTERS 
1. 	 Coordination with Prosecutors 
In an investigation relating to possible criminal activity in violation of federal law, 
the agent conducting the investigation shall maintain periodic written or oral 
contact with the appropriate federal prosecutor, as circumstances warrant and as 
requested by the prosecutor. When, during such an investigation, a matter appears 
arguably to warrant prosecution, the agent shall present the relevant facts to the 
appropriate federal prosecutor. Information on investigations that have been 
closed shall be available on request to a United States Attorney or his or her 
designee or an appropriate Department of Justice official. 
2. 	 Criminal Matters Outside FBI Jurisdiction 
When credible information is received by an FBI field office concerning serious 
criminal activity not within the FBI's investigative jurisdiction, the field office 
shall promptly transmit the information or refer the complainant to a law 
enforcement agency having jurisdiction, except where disclosure would 
jeopardize an ongoing investigation, endanger the safety of an individual, disclose 
the identity of a human source, interfere with a human source's cooperation, or 
reveal legally privileged information. If full disclosure is not made for the reasons 
indicated, then, whenever feasible, the FBI field office shall make at least limited 
disclosure to a law enforcement agency or agencies having jurisdiction, and full 
disclosure shall be made as soon as the need for restricting disclosure is no longer 
present. Where full disclosure is not made to the appropriate law enforcement 
agencies within 180 days, the FBI field office shall promptly notify FBI 
Headquarters in writing of the facts and circumstances concerning the criminal 
activity. The FBI shall make periodic reports to the Deputy Attorney General on 
such nondisclosures and incomplete disclosures, in a form suitable to protect the 
identity of human sources. 
3. 	 Reporting of Criminal Activity 
a. 	 When it appears that an FBI agent or employee has engaged in criminal 
activity in the course of an investigation under these Guidelines, the FBI 
shall notify the United States Attorney's Office or an appropriate 
Department of Justice Division. When it appears that a human source has 
engaged in criminal activity in the course of an investigation under these 
Guidelines, the FBI shall proceed as provided in the Attorney General's 
Guidelines Regarding the Use of FBI Confidential Human Sources. When 
information concerning possible criminal activity by any other person 
appears in the course of an investigation under these Guidelines, the FBI 
shall initiate an investigation of the criminal activity if warranted, and 
shall proceed as provided in paragraph 1. or 2. 
b. 	 The reporting requirements under this paragraph relating to criminal 
activity by FBI agents or employees or human sources do not apply to 
otherwise illegal activity that is authorized in conformity with these 
Guidelines or other Attorney General guidelines or to minor traffic 
offenses. 
D. 	 INFORMATION RELATING TO NATIONAL SECURITY AND FOREIGN 
INTELLIGENCE MATTERS 
The general principle reflected in current laws and policies is that there is a responsibility 
to provide information as consistently and fully as possible to agencies with relevant 
responsibilities to protect the United States and its people fiom terrorism and other threats 
to the national security, except as limited by specific constraints on such sharing. The 
FBI's responsibilities in this area include carrying out the requirements of the 
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Intelligence Community, Federal Law 
Enforcement Agencies, and the Department of Homeland Security Concerning , 
Information Sharing (March 4,2003), or any successor memorandum of understanding or 
agreement. Specific requirements also exist for internal coordination and consultation 
with other Department of Justice components, and for provision of national security and 
foreign intelligence information to White House agencies, as provided in the ensuing 
paragraphs. 
1. 	 Department of Justice 
a. 	 The National Security Division shall have access to all information 
obtained by the FBI through activities relating to threats to the national 
security or foreign intelligence. The Director of the FBI and the Assistant 
Attorney General for National Security shall consult concerning these 
activities whenever requested by either of them, and the FBI shall provide 
such reports and information concerning these activities as the Assistant 
Attorney General for National Security may request. In addition to any 
reports or information the Assistant Attorney General for National 
Security may specially request under this subparagraph, the FBI shall 
provide annual reports to the National Security Division concerning its 
foreign intelligence collection program, including information concerning 
the scope and nature of foreign intelligence collection activities in each 
FBI field office. 
b. 	 The FBI shall keep the National Security Division apprised of all 
information obtained through activities under these Guidelines that is 
necessary to the ability of the United States to investigate or protect 
against threats to the national security, which shall include regular 
consultations between the FBI and the National Security Division to 
exchange advice and information relevant to addressing such threats 
through criminal prosecution or other means. 
c. 	 Subject to subparagraphs d. and e., relevant United States Attorneys' 
Offices shall have access to and shall receive information from the FBI 
relating to threats to the national security, and may engage in consultations 
with the FBI relating to such threats, to the same extent as the National 
Security Division. The relevant United States Attorneys' Offices shall 
receive such access and information from the FBI field offices. 
d. 	 In a counterintelligence investigation -i.e., an investigation relating to a 
matter described in Part VII.S.2 of these Guidelines -the FBI's provision 
of information to and consultation with a United States Attorney's Office 
are subject to authorization by the National Security Division. In 
consultation with the Executive Office for United States Attorneys and the 
FBI, the National Security Division shall establish policies setting forth 
circumstances in which the FBI will consult with the National Security 
Division prior to informing relevant United States Attorneys' Offices 
about such an investigation. The policies established by the National 
Security Division under this subparagraph shall (among other things) 
provide that: 
1. 	 the National Security Division will, within 30 days, authorize the 
FBI to share with the United States Attorneys' Offices information 
relating to certain espionage investigations, as defined by the 
policies, unless such information is withheld because of substantial 
national security considerations; and 
. . 
11. 	 the FBI may consult freely with United States Attorneys' Offices 
concerning investigations within the scope of this subparagraph 
during an emergency, so long as the National Security Division is 
notified of such consultation as soon as practical after the 
consultation. 
e. 	 Information shared with a United States Attorney's Office pursuant to 
subparagraph c. or d. shall be disclosed only to the United States Attorney 
or any Assistant United States Attorneys designated by the United States 
Attorney as points of contact to receive such information. The United 
States Attorneys and designated Assistant United States Attorneys shall 
have appropriate security clearances and shall receive training in the 
handling of classified information and information derived from the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, including training concerning the 
secure handling and storage of such information and training concerning 
requirements and limitations relating to the use, retention, and 
dissemination of such information. 
The disclosure and sharing of information by the FBI under ths paragraph 
is subject to any limitations required in orders issued by the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court, controls imposed by the originators of 
sensitive material, and restrictions established by the Attorney General or 
the Deputy Attorney General in particular cases. The disclosure and 
sharing of information by the FBI under hs paragraph that may disclose 
the identity of human sources is governed by the relevant provisions of the 
Attorney General's Guidelines Regarding the Use of FBI Confidential 
Human Sources. 
2. 	 White House 
In order to carry out their responsibilities, the President, the Vice President, the 
Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, the Assistant to the 
President for Homeland Security Affairs, the National Security Council and its 
staff, the Homeland Security Council and its staff, and other White House 
officials and offices require information from all federal agencies, including 
foreign intelligence, and information relating to international terrorism and other 
threats to the national security. The FBI accordingly may disseminate to the 
mte House foreign intelligence and national security information obtained 
through activities under these Guidelines, subject to the following standards and 
procedures: 
a. 	 Requests to the FBI for such information fiom the White House shall be 
made through the National Security Council staff or Homeland Security 
Council staff including, but not limited to, the National Security Council 
Legal and Intelligence Directorates and Office of Combating Terrorism, 
or through the President's Intelligence Advisory Board or the Counsel to 
the President. 
b. 	 Compromising information concerning domestic officials or political 
organizations, or information concerning activities of United States 
persons intended to affect the political process in the United States, may 
be disseminated to the White House only with the approval of the Attorney 
General, based on a determination that such dissemination is needed for 
foreign intelligence purposes, for the purpose of protecting against 
international terrorism or other threats to the national security, or for the 
conduct of foreign affairs. However, such approval is not required for 
dissemination to the mte House of information concerning efforts of 
foreign intelligence services to penetrate the White House, or concerning 
contacts by White House personnel with foreign intelligence service 
personnel. 
c. 	 Examples of types of information that are suitable for dissemination to the 
mte House on a routine basis include, but are not limited to: 
1. 	 information concerning international terrorism; 
. . 11. 	 information concerning activities of foreign intelligence services in 
the United States; 
...111. 	 information indicative of imminent hostilities involving any 
foreign power; 
iv. 	 information concerning potential cyber threats to the United States 
or its allies; 
v. 	 information indicative of policy positions adopted by foreign 
officials, governments, or powers, or their reactions to United 
States foreign policy initiatives; 
vi. 	 information relating to possible changes in leadership positions of 
foreign governments, parties, factions, or powers; 
vii. 	 information concerning foreign economic or foreign political 
matters that might have national security ramifications; and 
. . . viii. 	 information set forth in regularly published national intelligence 
requirements. 
d. 	 Communications by the FBI to the White House that relate to a national 
security matter and concern a litigation issue for a specific pending case 
must be made known to the Office of the Attorney General, the Office of 
the Deputy Attorney General, or the Office of the Associate Attorney 
General. White House policy may specially limit or prescribe the White 
House personnel who may request information concerning such issues 
fiom the FBI. 
e. 	 The limitations on dissemination of information by the FBI to the White 
House under these Guidelines do not apply to dissemination to the White 
House of information acquired in the course of an FBI investigation 
requested by the White House into the background of a potential employee 
or appointee, or responses to requests from the White House under 
Executive Order 10450. 
3. 	 Special Statutory Requirements 
a. 	 Dissemination of information acquired under the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act is, to the extent provided in that Act, subject to 
minimization procedures and other requirements specified in that Act. 
b. 	 Information obtained through the use of National Security Letters under 15 
U.S.C. 1681v may be disseminated in conformity with the general 
standards of this Part. Information obtained through the use of National 
Security Letters under other statutes may be disseminated in conformity 
with the general standards of this Part, subject to any applicable limitations 
in their governing statutory provisions: 12 U.S.C. 3414(a)(5)(B); 15 
U.S.C. 1681u(f); 18 U.S.C. 2709(d); 50 U.S.C. 436(e). 
VII. 	 DEFINITIONS 
A. 	 CONSENSUAL MONITORING: monitoring of communications for which a court order 
or warrant is not legally required because of the consent of a party to the communication. 
B. 	 EMPLOYEE: an FBI employee or an employee of another agency working under the 
direction and control of the FBI. 
C. 	 FOR OR ON BEHALF OF A FOREIGN POWER: the determination that activities are 
for or on behalf of a foreign power shall be based on consideration of the extent to which 
the foreign power is involved in: 
1. 	 control or policy direction; 
2. 	 financial or material support; or 
3. 	 leadership, assignments, or discipline. 
D. 	 FOREIGN COMPUTER INTRUSION: the use or attempted use of any cyber-activity or 
other means, by, for, or on behalf of a foreign power to scan, probe, or gain unauthorized 
access into one or more U.S.-based computers. 
E. 	 FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE: information relating to the capabilities, intentions, or 
activities of foreign governments or elements thereof, foreign organizations or foreign 
persons, or international terrorists. 
F. 	 FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE REQUIREMENTS: 
1. 	 national intelligence requirements issued pursuant to authorization by the Director 
of National Intelligence, including the National Intelligence Priorities Framework 
and the National HUMINT Collection Directives, or any successor directives 
thereto; 
2. 	 requests to collect foreign intelligence by the President or by Intelligence 
Community oficials designated by the President; and 
3. 	 directions to collect foreign intelligence by the Attorney General, the Deputy 
Attorney General, or an official designated by the Attorney General. 
G. 	 FOREIGN POWER: 
1. 	 a foreign government or any component thereof, whether or not recognized by the 
United States; 
2. 	 a faction of a foreign nation or nations, not substantially composed of United 
States persons; 
3. 	 an entity that is openly acknowledged by a foreign government or governments to 
be directed and controlled by such foreign government or governments; 
4. 	 a group engaged in international terrorism or activities in preparation therefor; 
5. 	 a foreign-based political organization, not substantially composed of United States 
persons; or 
6. 	 an entity that is directed or controlled by a foreign government or governments. 
H. 	 HUMAN SOURCE: a Confidential Human Source as defined in the Attorney General's 
Guidelines Regarding the Use of FBI Confidential Human Sources. 
I. 	 INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES: any activity conducted for intelligence purposes or to 
affect political or governmental processes by, for, or on behalf of a foreign power. 
J. 	 INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM: 
Activities that: 
1. 	 involve violent acts or acts dangerous to human life that violate federal, state, 
local, or tribal criminal law or would violate such law if committed within the 
United States or a state, local, or tribal jurisdiction; 
2. 	 appear to be intended: 
1. 	 to intimidate or coerce a civilian population; 
.. 
11. 	 to influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion; or 
. . . 
111. 	 to affect the conduct of a government by assassination or kidnapping; and 
3. 	 occur totally outside the United States, or transcend national boundaries in terms 
of the means by which they are accomplished, the persons they appear to be 
intended to coerce or intimidate, or the locale in whch their perpetrators operate 
or seek asylum. 
K. 	 PROPRTETARY: a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, or other business entity 
operated on a commercial basis, which is owned, controlled, or operated wholly or in part 
on behalf of the FBI, and whose relationship with the FBI is concealed from thrd parties. 
L.. 
M. 
N. 
0. 
P. 
Q. PUBLICLY AVAILABLE: information that has been published or broadcast for public 
consumption, is available on request to the public, is accessible on-line or otherwise to 
the public, is available to the public by subscription or purchase, could be seen or heard 
by any casual observer, is made available at a meeting open to the public, or is obtained 
by visiting any place or attending any event that is open to the public. 
RECORDS: any records, databases, files, indices, information systems, or other retained 
information. 
SENSITIVE INVESTIGATIVE MATTER: an investigative matter involving the 
activities of a domestic public official or political candidate (involving corruption or a 
threat to the national security), religious or political organization or individual prominent 
in such an organization, or news media, or any other matter which, in the judgment of the 
official authorizing an investigation, should be brought to the attention of FBI 
Headquarters and other Department of Justice officials. 
SENSITIVE MONITORING CIRCUMSTANCE: 
1. 	 investigation of a member of Congress, a federal judge, a member of the 
Executive Branch at Executive Level IV or above, or a person who has served in 
such capacity within the previous two years; 
2. 	 investigation of the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, or Attorney General of any 
state or territory, or a judge or justice of the hghest court of any state or territory, 
concerning an offense involving bribery, conflict of interest, or extortion related to 
the performance of official duties; 
3. 	 a party to the communication is in the custody of the Bureau of Prisons or the 
United States Marshals Service or is being or has been afforded protection in the 
Witness Security Program; or 
4. 	 the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, or an Assistant Attorney 
General has requested that the FBI obtain prior approval for the use of consensual 
monitoring in a specific investigation. 
SPECIAL AGENT IN CHARGE: the Special Agent in Charge of an FBI field office 
(including an Acting Special Agent in Charge), except that the functions authorized for 
Special Agents in Charge by these Guidelines may also be exercised by the Assistant 
Director in Charge or by any Special Agent in Charge designated by the Assistant 
Director in Charge in an FBI field office headed by an Assistant Director, and by FBI 
Headquarters officials designated by the Director of the FBI. 
SPECIAL EVENTS MANAGEMENT: planning and conduct of public events or 
activities whose character may make them attractive targets for terrorist attack. 
R. 	 STATE, LOCAL, OR TRIBAL: any state or territory of the United States or political 
subdivision thereof, the District of Columbia, or Indian tribe. 
S. 	 THREAT TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY: 
1. 	 international terrorism; 
2. 	 espionage and other intelligence activities, sabotage, and assassination, conducted 
by, for, or on behalf of foreign powers, organizations, or persons; 
3. 	 foreign computer intrusion; and 
4. 	 other matters determined by the Attorney General, consistent with Executive 
Order 12333 or a successor order. 
T. 	 UNITED STATES: when used in a geographic sense, means all areas under the territorial 
sovereignty of the United States. 
U. 	 UNITED STATES PERSON: 
Any of the following, but not including any association or corporation that is a foreign 
power as defined in Subpart G.1.-.3.: 
1. 	 an individual who is a United States citizen or an alien lawfully admitted for 
permanent residence; 
2. 	 an unincorporated association substantially composed of individuals who are 
United States persons; or 
3. 	 a corporation incorporated in the United States. 
In applying paragraph 2., if a group or organization in the United States that is affiliated 
with a foreign-based international organization operates directly under the control of the 
international organization and has no independent program or activities in the United 
States, the membership of the entire international organization shall be considered in 
determining whether it is substantially composed of United States persons. If, however, 
the U.S.-based group or organization has programs or activities separate fiom, or in 
addition to, those directed by the international organization, only its membership in the 
United States shall be considered in determining whether it is substantially composed of 
United States persons. A classified directive provides firther guidance concerning the 
determination of United States person status. 
V. 	 USE: when used with respect to human sources, means obtaining information fiom, 
tasking, or otherwise operating such sources. 
Date: ?/y/@d 
Attorney General u 
